design-proposal: volume migration (#245)
kubevirt/community: design-proposals/volume-migration/volume-migration.md

# Overview
This design proposal extends KubeVirt APIs to enable the storage migration between PVCs.

## Motivation
In some circumstances, the guest owner may want to have the option of switching the storage provider or class for a group of volumes used by an active VM. The VM must currently be turned off and recreated for this operation causing service disruptions and downtime.

## Goals
Design and develop an API to handle storage migration between PVCs.

 ## Non  Goals
*  This features is not directly aimed for live migrating the VM using RWO volumes. Hence, the API covers and refers only to the volume migration.

> *  This design doesn't cover migration between storage classes, but rather implements a basic APIs that can be used by overlaying tooling

Reviewer: typo `overlaying` should be `overlying`

> *  This design doesn't include the creation of the destination PVCs, but it expects the destination PVCs to exist.

Reviewer: remove `but` so it reads `the destination PVCs, it expects the destination PVCs to exist`

 ## Definition of Users
This feature addresses for all KubeVirt users who want to move the PVCs assigned to a VM without workload interruptions.

## User Stories

>   1. As a VM owner, the storage class of volumes used by a running VM is deprecated and I need to move the VMs usin another storage class

Reviewer: typo `usin` should be `using` but I would rewrite this as `the storage class of volumes used by a running VM is deprecated, and the volumes need to be moved to another storage class`

# Design
This proposal introduces a new CRD called `VolumeMigration`

```golang
type VolumeMigration struct {
	metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
	metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`

	Spec VolumeMigrationSpec `json:"spec"`

	// +optional
	Status *VolumeMigrationStatus `json:"status,omitempty"`
}

type VolumeMigrationList struct {
	metav1.TypeMeta `json:",inline"`
	metav1.ListMeta `json:"metadata"`
	// +listType=atomic
	Items []VolumeMigration `json:"items"`
}

// ReclaimPolicySourcePvc describes how the source PVC will be treated after the storage migration completes.
// The policies follows the same behavior as the RetainPolicy for PVs: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/#reclaiming
type ReclaimPolicySourcePvc string

const (
	DeleteReclaimPolicySourcePvc ReclaimPolicySourcePvc = "Delete"
	RetainReclaimPolicySourcePvc ReclaimPolicySourcePvc = "Retain"
)

type MigratedVolume struct {
	SourcePvc      string `json:"sourcePvc,omitempty" valid:"required"`
	DestinationPvc string `json:"destinationPvc,omitempty" valid:"required"`
	// ReclaimPolicySourcePvc describes how the source volumes will be
	// treated after a successful migration

> 	ReclaimPolicySourcePvc ReclaimPolicySourcePvc `json:"reclaimPolicySourcePvc,omitempty"`

Reviewer: Since this allows omitempty, what would be the behavior if the value is not specified? Would it default to retain or delete? Maybe mention what the expected behavior is in that case in a comment.

Author: I'll put this as a required field

}

type VolumeMigrationSpec struct {
	// MigratedVolumes is a list of volumes to be migrated

> 	MigratedVolume []MigratedVolume `json:"migratedVolume,omitempty"`

Author: Yes, this is possible. The API is independent from any VMs. The user needs only to specify the volumes, then the controller will group them by VMI. 
I'll add more details.

> 	MigratedVolume []MigratedVolume `json:"migratedVolume,omitempty"`

Author: I added the information at line:https://github.com/alicefr/community/blob/storage-class-migration/design-proposals/volume-migration/volume-migration.md?plain=1#L115

type VolumeMigrationState struct {
	// MigratedVolumes is a list of volumes to be migrated
	MigratedVolume []MigratedVolume `json:"migratedVolume,omitempty"`
	// VirtualMachineMigrationName state of the virtual machine migration
	// triggered by the storage migration
	VirtualMachineMigrationName string `json:"virtualMachineMigrationName,omitempty"`
	// VirtualMachineMigrationState state of the virtual machine migration
	// triggered by the storage migration
	VirtualMachineInstanceName string `json:"virtualMachineInstanceName,omitempty"`
	Succeeded bool `json:"succeeded,omitempty"`
	Failed bool `json:"failed,omitempty"`
	// The time the migration action began
	StartTimestamp *metav1.Time `json:"startTimestamp,omitempty"`
	// The time the migration action ended
	EndTimestamp *metav1.Time `json:"endTimestamp,omitempty"`
}

type RejectedMigratedVolume struct {
	SourcePvc string `json:"sourcePvc,omitempty" valid:"required"`
	Reason    string `json:"reason,omitempty" valid:"required"`
}

type VolumeMigrationStatus struct {
    // VolumeMigrationStates describes the migration of the migrated volumes
	VolumeMigrationStates []VolumeMigrationState   `json:"volumeMigrationStates,omitempty"`

> 	// PendingVolumes are the migrated volumes that aren't associated to a VMI and cannot by migrated with this APIs

Reviewer: typo `by` should be `be`
Thinking about it more, I thinking we should change the definition of `PendingVolumes` to volumes with one of the following properties:
- The target volume doesn't exist
- The migration hasn't started yet for whatever reason (maybe max concurrent reached, etc).
- The VM is not started, and thus cannot be migrated by the API

Reviewer: Maybe also have the reason for the pending in the struct. Not sure if we should make it a seperate struct or add a field to MigratedVolume

Author: I don't know if it is necessary to extend the PendingVolumes

>     * The target volume doesn't exist
> 

If the target PVC doesn't exist then the target pod remains pending waiting for the PVC to be created. Then, the VMI migration stays in `Scheduling` state and eventually in `Failed` state. While the VMI migration is in `Scheduling` this is counted under the NotStarted.

I could add more information. However, the user can query the VMI migration to get all the information on a particular case.

>     * The migration hasn't started yet for whatever reason (maybe max concurrent reached, etc).
> 

Again, this is counted under NotStarted`.

>     * The VM is not started, and thus cannot be migrated by the API

In this case, there is no VMI and the migration doesn't take place and it is counted in `Pending`

Reviewer: So what is the difference between pending and not started then? IIRC for pods pending encapsulates all the reasons I mentioned above. I am trying to reduce the number of lists if possible.

Author: Pending means that there are no VMI associated to the PVCs. Hence, either the user needs to start the VM or we need to use another method to perform the offline migration.
`NotStarted` means that there is a VM and a VirtualMachineInstanceMigration has been created but for some reason the migration hasn't started yet.

	PendingVolumes        []MigratedVolume         `json:"pendingVolumes,omitempty"`
	// RejectedVolumes are a list of source migrated volumes that cannot be migrated

> 	RejectedVolumes       []RejectedMigratedVolume `json:"rejectedVolumes,omitempty"`

Author: I added this information here: https://github.com/alicefr/community/blob/storage-class-migration/design-proposals/volume-migration/volume-migration.md?plain=1#L125-L126

	Total                 int                      `json:"total,omitempty"`
	Failed                int                      `json:"failed,omitempty"`
	Succeeded             int                      `json:"succeeded,omitempty"`
	NotStarted            int                      `json:"notStarted,omitempty"`
	Running               int                      `json:"running,omitempty"`
	Pending               int                      `json:"pending,omitempty"`
	Rejected              int                      `json:"rejected,omitempty"`
}
```

The `VolumeMigration` expects a list of source and destination PVCs and the destination PVCs needs to be created either manually by the user or other tools.

> According to the 'ReclaimPolicySourcePvc', KubeVirt will determine how to handle the source PVCs. For the `Delete` policy, the source PVC will be automatically deleted while for the `Retain` policy, the PVC will be left untouched.

Reviewer: What about if the policy is unset? the struct allows for an empty value.

Author: We can either set a default or validate it in the webhook. I personally prefer the latter.

The core idea is that it is KubeVirt responsibility to handle the lifecycle of the source PVCs as it is the only component able to orchestrate and set the migration as successful.

Currently, this API only supports to migrate PVCs only if they are associated to a running VM. If there are source PVCs without a VMI, they are listed as `pending`. If a VM associated to those PVCs will be started after the `VolumeMigration` object creation, this event will trigger the reconcilitation of the volume migration and the pending volume will be added to the `VolumeMigrationStates`.

> Certain types of volumes and disks aren't suitable to be migrated or the feature isn't supported yet. Those migrated volumes will be marked as rejected. If there are other volumes belonging to the same VMI as the rejected ones, the VM migration will be rejected also for those volumes.

Reviewer: `the VM migration will be rejected for those volumes as well`

> Certain types of volumes and disks aren't suitable to be migrated or the feature isn't supported yet. Those migrated volumes will be marked as rejected. If there are other volumes belonging to the same VMI as the rejected ones, the VM migration will be rejected also for those volumes.

Author: If the PVC is shared between mutliple VMs, then it needs to be marked as shareable and this case isn't supported. Hence, the volume will be listed under `Rejected Volumes`.

About the sharing with an arbitrary pod, no, I'm not handling this case. Also KubeVirt doesn't consider it to my knowledge.

> Certain types of volumes and disks aren't suitable to be migrated or the feature isn't supported yet. Those migrated volumes will be marked as rejected. If there are other volumes belonging to the same VMI as the rejected ones, the VM migration will be rejected also for those volumes.

Reviewer 2: I think there is a need to list explicitly the prerequisites for a PVC to be suitable for migration. Or alternatively, define the conditions when PVCs are rejected. Probably this should not aim to cover all the corner-cases right from the start, but at least some simple ones (which will be supported at first) are worth to be documented in the proposal.

> Certain types of volumes and disks aren't suitable to be migrated or the feature isn't supported yet. Those migrated volumes will be marked as rejected. If there are other volumes belonging to the same VMI as the rejected ones, the VM migration will be rejected also for those volumes.

Reviewer 2: > If the PVC is shared between mutliple VMs, then it needs to be marked as shareable

I am now looking at the API:
```go
	// If specified the disk is made sharable and multiple write from different VMs are permitted
	// +optional
	Shareable *bool `json:"shareable,omitempty"`
```
Do I need to mark a disk as shareable if it is used in several VMs in read-only mode? The comment only mentions multiple writes, hence I am not sure.

> Certain types of volumes and disks aren't suitable to be migrated or the feature isn't supported yet. Those migrated volumes will be marked as rejected. If there are other volumes belonging to the same VMI as the rejected ones, the VM migration will be rejected also for those volumes.

Author: @vasiliy-ul we should update the comment. But yes it needs to be set also for read-only disks, otherwise QEMU is creating a lock

*  This design doesn't include the creation of the destination PVCs, it expects the destination PVCs to exist.

 ## Definition of Users
This feature addresses for all KubeVirt users who want to move the PVCs assigned to a VM without workload interruptions.

## User Stories

  1. As a VM owner, the storage class of volumes used by a running VM is deprecated, and the volumes need to be moved to another storage class
  2. As a VM owner, I want to use higher performance storage class that is now available in the cluster
  3. As a VM owner, I see my non-resizable storage device filling up and I want to move my VM to a larger storage device without interruption in order to give it more storage
  4. As an infra admin, I need to replace the storage array due to a hardware refresh and I want to do this without stopping the VMs in order to make this infra operation transparent to VM owners.

## Repos

  - [kubevirt/kubevirt](https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt)

# Design
This proposal introduces a new CRD called `VolumeMigration`

```golang
type VolumeMigration struct {
	metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
	metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`

> 	Spec VolumeMigrationSpec `json:"spec"`

Reviewer 2: Probably should be required:

```suggestion
	Spec VolumeMigrationSpec `json:"spec" valid:"required"`
```

> 	Status *VolumeMigrationStatus `json:"status,omitempty"`

Reviewer 2: When looking at other KubeVirt CRs they do not use `Status` as pointer. E.g.:

```go
type VirtualMachineInstanceMigration struct {
	...
	Status            VirtualMachineInstanceMigrationStatus `json:"status,omitempty"`
}
```

Shall we do the same here?

```suggestion
	Status VolumeMigrationStatus `json:"status,omitempty"`
```

Reviewer: In general if a field is omitempty you should make it a pointer. But with the status I agree it should not be since everyone else doesn't have it a pointer, and having to check if the status is nil all over the place can be annoying.

Author: Done

}

type VolumeMigrationList struct {
	metav1.TypeMeta `json:",inline"`
	metav1.ListMeta `json:"metadata"`
	Items []VolumeMigration `json:"items"`
}

type ReclaimPolicySourcePvc string

const (
	DeleteReclaimPolicySourcePvc ReclaimPolicySourcePvc = "Delete"
	RetainReclaimPolicySourcePvc ReclaimPolicySourcePvc = "Retain"
)

type MigratedVolume struct {
	SourcePvc      string `json:"sourcePvc,omitempty" valid:"required"`
	DestinationPvc string `json:"destinationPvc,omitempty" valid:"required"`
	ReclaimPolicySourcePvc ReclaimPolicySourcePvc `json:"reclaimPolicySourcePvc,omitempty" valid:"required"`
}

type VolumeMigrationSpec struct {
	MigratedVolume []MigratedVolume `json:"migratedVolume,omitempty"`
}

type RejectedMigratedVolume struct {
	SourcePvc string `json:"sourcePvc,omitempty" valid:"required"`
	Reason    string `json:"reason,omitempty" valid:"required"`
}

type RejectedVolumeMigration struct {
	RejectedVolumes []RejectedMigratedVolume `json:"rejectedVolumes,omitempty" valid:"required"`

> 	AssociatedVolumes []string `json:"associatedVolumes,omitempty"`

Reviewer 2: Could you give an example how this field is used?

Author: Of course, here an example with a shareable disk:
```yaml
---
apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1
kind: VirtualMachine
metadata:
  name: vm
spec:
  template:
    spec:
      domain:
        devices:
          disks:
          - disk:
              bus: virtio
            shareable: true
            name: datavolumedisk1
          - disk:
              bus: virtio
            name: datavolumedisk2
      volumes:
      - dataVolume:
          name: src-pvc1
        name: datavolumedisk1
      - dataVolume:
          name: src-pvc2
        name: datavolumedisk2
---
apiVersion: storage.kubevirt.io/v1alpha1
kind: VolumeMigration
metadata:
  name: vol-mig
spec:
  migratedVolume:
  - sourcePvc: src-pvc1
    destinationPvc: dest-pvc1
    reclaimPolicySourcePvc: Delete
  - sourcePvc: scr-pvc2
    destinationPvc: dest-pvc2
    reclaimPolicySourcePvc: Delete
status:
  virtualMachineInstanceName: vm
  rejectedVolumeMigration:
    rejectedVolumes:
    - sourcePvc: src-pvc1
      reason: "Shareable disks aren't supported to be migrated"
    associatedVolumes:
    - src-pvc2
  phase: Rejected #(or Failed)
  phaseTransitionTimestamps:
  - phase: Rejected
    phaseTransitionTimestamp: "2024-01-12T08:54:11Z"
```

The `AssociatedVolumes` is a way to signal that the `src-pvc2` configuration is valid.

Author: You could have multiple reasons why the migrated volumes are invalid. For example you have a VM with a shareable disk and one filesystem.

Reviewer: Maybe put this example in the document, so it is easy to find later.

Author: I'll do once we have a stable API for the status

Author: Updated the document with a similar example and the new API

> 	Reason            string   `json:"reason,omitempty" valid:"required"`

Reviewer 2: We already have `Reason` in each `RejectedVolumes` item. Could you give an example how this one is used?

Author: Yes, I left it on both places on purpose because we can have a reason only specific to a single disk (e.g shareable, hotplug...) or it can be related to the entire migration like the volumes belong to different VMIs.

Author: Here an example:
```yaml
apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1
kind: VirtualMachine
metadata:
  name: vm1
spec:
  template:
    spec:
      domain:
        devices:
          disks:
          - disk:
              bus: virtio
            name: datavolumedisk
      volumes:
      - dataVolume:
          name: src-pvc1
        name: datavolumedisk
---
apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1
kind: VirtualMachine
metadata:
  name: vm2
spec:
  template:
    spec:
      domain:
        devices:
          disks:
          - disk:
              bus: virtio
            name: datavolumedisk
      volumes:
      - dataVolume:
          name: src-pvc2
        name: datavolumedisk
---
apiVersion: storage.kubevirt.io/v1alpha1
kind: VolumeMigration
metadata:
  name: vol-mig
spec:
  migratedVolume:
  - sourcePvc: src-pvc1
    destinationPvc: dest-pvc1
    reclaimPolicySourcePvc: Delete
  - sourcePvc: scr-pvc2
    destinationPvc: dest-pvc2
    reclaimPolicySourcePvc: Delete
status:
  rejectedVolumeMigration:
    rejectedVolumes:
    - sourcePvc: src-pvc1
    - sourcePvc: src-pvc2
    reason: "Volumes needs to belong to the same VMI"
  phase: Rejected #(or Failed)
  phaseTransitionTimestamps:
  - phase: Rejected
    phaseTransitionTimestamp: "2024-01-12T08:54:11Z"
```

Reviewer: Same please put the examples in the document, it is helpful later.

Author: Updated the API and added a similar example

}

type VolumeMigrationPhase string

const (
	VolumeMigrationPhaseFailed     = "Failed"
	VolumeMigrationPhasePending    = "Pending"

> 	VolumeMigrationPhaseRejected   = "Rejected"

Reviewer 2: Probably we do not need this phase anymore since we decided to fail the migration if there are rejected volumes.

Author: Yes, you are right I can simplify this a little bit a put a condition

Author: Done

	VolumeMigrationPhaseRunning    = "Running"
	VolumeMigrationPhaseScheduling = "Scheduling"
	VolumeMigrationPhaseSucceeded  = "Succeeded"
	VolumeMigrationPhaseUnknown    = "Unknown"
)

type VolumeMigrationPhaseTransitionTimestamp struct {
	Phase                    VolumeMigrationPhase `json:"phase,omitempty"`
	PhaseTransitionTimestamp metav1.Time          `json:"phaseTransitionTimestamp,omitempty"`
}

type VolumeMigrationState struct {
	MigratedVolume []MigratedVolume `json:"migratedVolume,omitempty"`
	VirtualMachineMigrationName string `json:"virtualMachineMigrationName,omitempty"`
	Succeeded bool `json:"succeeded,omitempty"`
	Failed bool `json:"failed,omitempty"`
	StartTimestamp *metav1.Time `json:"startTimestamp,omitempty"`
	EndTimestamp *metav1.Time `json:"endTimestamp,omitempty"`
}

type VolumeMigrationStatus struct {
	VirtualMachineInstanceName string                  `json:"virtualMachineInstanceName,omitempty"`
	VolumeMigrationState       VolumeMigrationState    `json:"volumeMigrationState,omitempty"`
	PendingVolumes             []MigratedVolume        `json:"pendingVolumes,omitempty"`

> 	RejectedVolumeMigration    RejectedVolumeMigration `json:"rejectedVolumeMigration,omitempty"`

Author: I did in this way because `VolumeMigrationState` has the infomation for the migration while in the case on pending and rejected volumes the VM migration isn't triggered.

About the VMI name is because rejected volumes are associated to a VMI but not to a VMI migration. 
However, we can also leave them empty and have everything inside the same struct.

We could also simplify futher the status and remove the Succeeded and Failed bools.
Like:
```golang
type VolumeMigrationState struct {
	VirtualMachineInstanceName  string `json:"virtualMachineInstanceName,omitempty"`
	VirtualMachineMigrationName string `json:"virtualMachineMigrationName,omitempty"`

	MigratedVolumes         []MigratedVolume         `json:"migratedVolume,omitempty"`
	PendingVolumes          []MigratedVolume         `json:"pendingVolumes,omitempty"`
	RejectedVolumeMigration *RejectedVolumeMigration `json:"rejectedVolumeMigration,omitempty"`

	StartTimestamp *metav1.Time `json:"startTimestamp,omitempty"`
	EndTimestamp   *metav1.Time `json:"endTimestamp,omitempty"`
}

type VolumeMigrationStatus struct {
	VolumeMigrationState *VolumeMigrationState `json:"volumeMigrationState,omitempty"`
	Phase                VolumeMigrationPhase  `json:"phase,omitempty"`
	// PhaseTransitionTimestamp is the timestamp of when the last phase change occurred
	PhaseTransitionTimestamps []VolumeMigrationPhaseTransitionTimestamp `json:"phaseTransitionTimestamps,omitempty"`
}
```

> 	RejectedVolumeMigration    RejectedVolumeMigration `json:"rejectedVolumeMigration,omitempty"`

Reviewer 2: Can we go even further and simplify:

```go
	MigratedVolumes         []MigratedVolume         `json:"migratedVolume,omitempty"`
	PendingVolumes          []MigratedVolume         `json:"pendingVolumes,omitempty"`
	RejectedVolumeMigration *RejectedVolumeMigration `json:"rejectedVolumeMigration,omitempty"`
```

Probably we could introduce `type VolumeMigrationState struct` which combines the fields and then have a flat list:

```go
	VolumeMigrationStates         []VolumeMigrationState         `json:"volumeMigrationStates,omitempty"`
```

WDYT?

> 	RejectedVolumeMigration    RejectedVolumeMigration `json:"rejectedVolumeMigration,omitempty"`

Author: I'm not sure I understand your suggestion.

Do you mean something like this:
```golang
type VolumeMigrationStatus struct {
        VirtualMachineInstanceName  string                                    `json:"virtualMachineInstanceName,omitempty"`
        VirtualMachineMigrationName string                                    `json:"virtualMachineMigrationName,omitempty"`
        StartTimestamp              *metav1.Time                              `json:"startTimestamp,omitempty"`
        EndTimestamp                *metav1.Time                              `json:"endTimestamp,omitempty"`
        ValidVolumes                []MigratedVolume                          `json:"validVolumes,omitempty"`
        PendingVolumes              []MigratedVolume                          `json:"pendingVolumes,omitempty"`
        RejectedVolumes             []MigratedVolume                          `json:"rejectedVolumeMigration,omitempty"`
        Conditions                  []Conditions                              `json:"conditions,omitempty"`
        Phase                       VolumeMigrationPhase                      `json:"phase,omitempty"`
        PhaseTransitionTimestamps   []VolumeMigrationPhaseTransitionTimestamp `json:"phaseTransitionTimestamps,omitempty"`
}
```

> 	RejectedVolumeMigration    RejectedVolumeMigration `json:"rejectedVolumeMigration,omitempty"`

Author: Or something like this:
```golang 
type MigratedVolumeState string

const (
        MigratedVolumeStateValid    = "Valid"
        MigratedVolumeStatePending  = "Pending"
        MigratedVolumeStateRejected = "Rejected"
)

type VolumeMigrationState struct {
        SourcePvc string              `json:"sourcePvc,omitempty"`
        State     MigratedVolumeState `json:"state,omitempty"`
        Reason    string              `json:"reason,omitempty"`
}

type VolumeMigrationStatus struct {
        VolumeMigrationStates       []VolumeMigrationState                    `json:"volumeMigrationStates,omitempty"`
        VirtualMachineInstanceName  string                                    `json:"virtualMachineInstanceName,omitempty"`
        VirtualMachineMigrationName string                                    `json:"virtualMachineMigrationName,omitempty"`
        StartTimestamp              *metav1.Time                              `json:"startTimestamp,omitempty"`
        EndTimestamp                *metav1.Time                              `json:"endTimestamp,omitempty"`
        Phase                       VolumeMigrationPhase                      `json:"phase,omitempty"`
        PhaseTransitionTimestamps   []VolumeMigrationPhaseTransitionTimestamp `json:"phaseTransitionTimestamps,omitempty"`
}

```

> 	RejectedVolumeMigration    RejectedVolumeMigration `json:"rejectedVolumeMigration,omitempty"`

Reviewer 2: Ah, sorry. I probably expressed it badly. I was thinking if it could make sense to merge
```go
	MigratedVolumes         []MigratedVolume         `json:"migratedVolume,omitempty"`
	PendingVolumes          []MigratedVolume         `json:"pendingVolumes,omitempty"`
	RejectedVolumeMigration *RejectedVolumeMigration `json:"rejectedVolumeMigration,omitempty"`
```
into one list.

Smth like in the code below:

```go
// struct with the current status for a single volume
type VolumeStatus struct {
	MigratedVolume MigratedVolume
	Status string //pending, rejected, completed, etc.
	Reason string
	... //maybe other fields
}

type VolumeMigrationState struct {
	VirtualMachineInstanceName  string `json:"virtualMachineInstanceName,omitempty"`
	VirtualMachineMigrationName string `json:"virtualMachineMigrationName,omitempty"`

	// one list instead of	
	//MigratedVolumes         []MigratedVolume         `json:"migratedVolume,omitempty"`
	//PendingVolumes          []MigratedVolume         `json:"pendingVolumes,omitempty"`
	//RejectedVolumeMigration *RejectedVolumeMigration `json:"rejectedVolumeMigration,omitempty"`
	VolumeStatuses []VolumeStatuses `json:"volumeStatuses,omitempty"`

	StartTimestamp *metav1.Time `json:"startTimestamp,omitempty"`
	EndTimestamp   *metav1.Time `json:"endTimestamp,omitempty"`
}

type VolumeMigrationStatus struct {
	VolumeMigrationState *VolumeMigrationState `json:"volumeMigrationState,omitempty"`
	Phase                VolumeMigrationPhase  `json:"phase,omitempty"`
	// PhaseTransitionTimestamp is the timestamp of when the last phase change occurred
	PhaseTransitionTimestamps []VolumeMigrationPhaseTransitionTimestamp `json:"phaseTransitionTimestamps,omitempty"`
}
```

> 	RejectedVolumeMigration    RejectedVolumeMigration `json:"rejectedVolumeMigration,omitempty"`

Author: ok :) make sense to me, thanks!

> 	RejectedVolumeMigration    RejectedVolumeMigration `json:"rejectedVolumeMigration,omitempty"`

Author: Updated with the suggested changes

	Phase                      VolumeMigrationPhase    `json:"phase,omitempty"`
	// PhaseTransitionTimestamp is the timestamp of when the last phase change occurred
	PhaseTransitionTimestamps []VolumeMigrationPhaseTransitionTimestamp `json:"phaseTransitionTimestamps,omitempty"`
}
```

Potentially, users could specify multiple migrated volumes and those could belong to the same or different VMI or none of the VMIs. The volume migration controller will classify and group the volumes defined on the same VMI.

> Currently, this API supports to migrate PVCs only if they are associated to a running VM. Therefore, the controller will reject all the volume migration objects that have migrated volumes belonging to different VMIs or aren't associated to any. If all the migrated volumes aren't associated to a VMI, the object is in `pending` state as the VMI could be created in a later time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Currently, this API supports to migrate PVCs only if they are associated to a single running VM. Therefore, the controller will reject all the volume migration objects that have migrated volumes belonging to different VMIs or aren't associated to any. If all the migrated volumes aren't associated to a VMI, the object is in `pending` state as the VMI could be created in a later time.
```

> The `VolumeMigration` expects a list of source and destination PVCs and the destination PVCs needs to be created either manually by the user or other tools.

Reviewer 2: One thing that bothers me here is: how do I know which node the destination PVCs should be bound to? If I understand correctly, in order to prepare for the volume migration I need to somehow find a node that have sufficient amount of resources (CPU, memory, devices, storage, etc.) to accommodate my VM. Only then I should create the PVCs so that they are assigned to that node. Does that mean that users will need to 'predict' where the scheduler will migrate the VM to? Or maybe do not use PVCs with immediate binding (only WFFC)? Or how is that supposed to work?

Author: @vasiliy-ul I think this a general problem with immediate binding PVCs not specific to this design. It is the case also if you create a VM with a Immediate binding PVC. Potentially, the virt-launcher pod could remain in pending state if the node where the PVC is bound doesn't match the scheduling constraints.

Reviewer: So remember, PVCs are not bound to nodes (unless it is a local volume with a WFFC storage) immediate binding PVCs in general are just bound to the matching PV, and then when the workload is scheduled to run on a node, the volume is attached to that node before the workload starts running. But that has nothing to do with the status of the volume.

Reviewer 2: :facepalm: Right, I was probably thinking too much about it with local volumes in mind.

The core idea is that it is KubeVirt responsibility to handle the lifecycle of the source PVCs as it is the only component able to orchestrate and set the migration as successful.

Certain types of volumes and disks aren't suitable to be migrated or the feature isn't supported yet. Those migrated volumes will be marked as rejected. 
If there are other volumes belonging to the same VMI as the rejected ones, the VM migration won't be created for those volumes as well. Those volumes will be listed under `AssociatedVolumes` in the `RejectedVolumeMigration` field.

The current types of rejected volumes are:
  * Hotpluggable volumes, this case will be considered in a later iteration.
  * Filesystem volumes, currently virtiofs doesn't support live-migration.
  * Shareable volumes, if a disk is shared between multiple VMs, it cannot be safely copied.
  * LUNs disks, originally the disk might support SCSI protocol but the destination PVC class not. This case will be considered in a later iteration.

In the `VolumeMigrationStatus` reports the phase of the migration:

>   * `Pending` if there are not VMI associated to the migrated volumes

Reviewer: if there are `no` VMI associated

Declaring all volumes hotpluggable could be a potential remedy, but we prefer to avoid it because it has been shown to be fragile for some storage providers and opaque to Kubernetes.

The only workable and generic solution for this restriction appears to be to live migrate the VM with storage. Live migration involves the creation of a new virt-launcher pod by KubeVirt that has the destination PVCs attached. The source virt-launcher pod and source PVCs are removed after the migration is finished because they are no longer needed.

This migrating to a new storage provider is an exceptional operation, and very resource intensive. If in the future, the k8s community will consider the volume mutability in the pod spec, then the lighter approach could be taken into consideration.

### Design

> This feature adds an additional controller for the CRD `Volume Migration` to virt-controller. Once the VolumeMigration object is created then KubeVirt will update the VMI status with the source and destination volume pair.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This feature adds an additional controller for the CRD `Volume Migration` to virt-controller. Once the VolumeMigration object is created then KubeVirt will update the VMI status with the source and destination volume pairs.
```

  labels:
    kubevirt.io/vm: vm-alpine-datavolume
  name: vm-alpine-datavolume
spec:
  dataVolumeTemplates:
  - metadata:
      creationTimestamp: null
      name: source-pvc
    spec:
      pvc:
        accessModes:
        - ReadWriteOnce
        resources:
          requests:
            storage: 1Gi
        storageClassName: local
      source:
        registry:
          url: docker://registry:5000/kubevirt/alpine-container-disk-demo:devel
  running: true
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        kubevirt.io/vm: vm-alpine-datavolume
    spec:
      domain:
        devices:
          disks:
          - disk:
              bus: virtio
            name: datavolumedisk1
          interfaces:
          - masquerade: {}
            name: default
        resources:
          requests:
            memory: 128Mi
      networks:
      - name: default
        pod: {}
      terminationGracePeriodSeconds: 0
      volumes:
      - dataVolume:
          name: source-pvc
        name: datavolumedisk1

```

Trigger the migration with:
```yaml
apiVersion: storage.kubevirt.io/v1alpha1
kind: VolumeMigration
metadata:
  name: sc-mig
spec:

>   vmiName: vmi

Reviewer 2: Currently, there is no `vmiName` field in the `VolumeMigration` definition. Shall we add it to explicitly state that we support only a single VMI per request?

Author: sorry, this is a leftover and it should be removed

# Overview

> This design proposal extends KubeVirt APIs to enable the storage migration between PVCs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This design proposal extends KubeVirt APIs to enable storage migration between PVCs.
```

## Motivation

> In some circumstances, the guest owner may want to have the option of switching the storage provider or class for a group of volumes used by an active VM. The VM must currently be turned off and recreated for this operation, causing service disruptions and downtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In some circumstances, the guest owner may want to have the option of switching the storage provider or class for a group of volumes used by an active VM. Currently the VM must be turned off and recreated, causing service disruptions and downtime.
```

## Goals

> Design and develop an API to handle storage migration between PVCs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Design and develop an API to handle live storage migration between PVCs.
```

 ## Non  Goals

> *  This features is not directly aimed for live migrating the VM using RWO volumes. Hence, the API covers and refers only to the volume migration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*  This feature is not directly aimed at live migrating the VM using RWO volumes. Hence, the API covers and refers only to the volume migration.
```

*  This design doesn't cover migration between storage classes, but rather implements basic APIs that can be used by overlying tooling.
*  This design doesn't include the creation of the destination PVCs, it expects the destination PVCs to exist.

 ## Definition of Users

> This feature addresses for all KubeVirt users who want to move the PVCs assigned to a VM without workload interruptions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This feature is for all KubeVirt users who want to move the PVCs assigned to a VM without workload interruptions.
```

	RetainReclaimPolicySourcePvc ReclaimPolicySourcePvc = "Retain"
)

type MigratedVolume struct {
	SourcePvc      string `json:"sourcePvc,omitempty" valid:"required"`
	DestinationPvc string `json:"destinationPvc,omitempty" valid:"required"`
	ReclaimPolicySourcePvc ReclaimPolicySourcePvc `json:"reclaimPolicySourcePvc" valid:"required"`
}

type VolumeMigrationSpec struct {
	MigratedVolume []MigratedVolume `json:"migratedVolume,omitempty"`
}

type VolumeMigrationPhase string

const (
	VolumeMigrationPhasePending    = "Pending"
	VolumeMigrationPhaseRunning    = "Running"
	VolumeMigrationPhaseScheduling = "Scheduling"
	VolumeMigrationPhaseSucceeded  = "Succeeded"
	VolumeMigrationPhaseFailed     = "Failed"
	VolumeMigrationPhaseUnknown    = "Unknown"
)

type VolumeMigrationPhaseTransitionTimestamp struct {
	Phase                    VolumeMigrationPhase `json:"phase,omitempty"`
	PhaseTransitionTimestamp metav1.Time          `json:"phaseTransitionTimestamp,omitempty"`
}

type MigratedVolumeState string

const (
        MigratedVolumeStateValid    = "Valid"
        MigratedVolumeStatePending  = "Pending"
        MigratedVolumeStateRejected = "Rejected"
)

type VolumeMigrationState struct {

>         SourcePvc string              `json:"sourcePvc,omitempty"`

Author: Yes, make sense

        StartTimestamp              *metav1.Time                              `json:"startTimestamp,omitempty"`
        EndTimestamp                *metav1.Time                              `json:"endTimestamp,omitempty"`
        Phase                       VolumeMigrationPhase                      `json:"phase,omitempty"`
        PhaseTransitionTimestamps   []VolumeMigrationPhaseTransitionTimestamp `json:"phaseTransitionTimestamps,omitempty"`
}
```

Users may define more than one migrated volume, and those volumes may be associated with the same VMI, a different VMI, or none at all. The volumes defined on the same VMI will be categorized and grouped by the volume migration controller.

At the moment, PVCs can only be migrated using this API if they belong to a single running virtual machine. Consequently, all volume migration objects that have migrated volumes that are associated with different VMIs will be rejected by the controller. The object is in the `Pending` state if none of the migrated volumes have been assigned to a VMI, since the VMI might be created at a later time.

> The `VolumeMigration` expects a list of source and destination PVCs and the destination PVCs needs to be created either manually by the user or other tools.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `VolumeMigration` expects a list of source and destination PVCs and the destination PVCs need to be created either manually by the user or other tools.
```

> According to the `ReclaimPolicySourcePvc`, KubeVirt will determine how to handle the source PVCs. The source PVC will be automatically deleted under the `Delete` policy, but it will remain untouched under the `Retain` policy.

Reviewer 2: Shall we specify a default one if no policy is provided by a user? Maybe `Retain`?

Author: I don't know, probably, even if I'm not sure which default is the best. I was thinking more to delete policy as the default one.

Reviewer 2: TBH, I do not have a strong opinion here. I checked `PersistentVolumeReclaimPolicy` and it has different defaults: `Retain` for manually created PVs and `Delete` for dynamic ones. So in our case, this could be `Delete` as well.

Author: yeah, I don't have a strong opinion either.  I guess we just need to well document what the default behavior is. Then, let's keep Delete as it is the case for PVCs

The core idea is that it is KubeVirt responsibility to handle the lifecycle of the source PVCs as it is the only component able to orchestrate and set the migration as successful.

Certain types of volumes and disks aren't suitable to be migrated or the feature isn't supported yet. Those migrated volumes will be marked as rejected. 

> If there are other valid volumes belonging to the same VMI as the rejected ones, the VM migration won't be created for those volumes as well. Those volumes will be listed as `Valid` in the `VolumeMigrationStates` field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The VM migration won't be created, if the VMI has rejected volumes, even if there are other valid volumes belonging to the same VMI. Those volumes will be listed as `Valid` in the `VolumeMigrationStates` field.
```

The current types of rejected volumes are:
  * Hotpluggable volumes, this case will be considered in a later iteration.
  * Filesystem volumes, currently virtiofs doesn't support live-migration.
  * Shareable volumes, if a disk is shared between multiple VMs, it cannot be safely copied.

>   * LUNs disks, originally the disk might support SCSI protocol but the destination PVC class not. This case will be considered in a later iteration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * LUNs disks, originally the disk might support SCSI protocol but the destination PVC class does not. This case will be considered in a later iteration.
```

> In the `VolumeMigrationStatus` reports the phase of the migration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `VolumeMigrationStatus` reports the phase of the migration:
```

  * `Pending` if there are no VMI associated to the migrated volumes
  * `Scheduling` if the VMI migration object has been created but the migration hasn't started yet
  * `Running` once the VMI migration starts
  * `Succeeded` if the VMI migration has succeeded
  * `Failed` if the VMI migration has failed or there are rejected volumes

## Design details and motivation

### Motivation on the approaches

> From libvirt there a multiple ways to achieve the storage migration. It is possible to simply copy the storage on the new destination and then swap the original disk with the new one. This approach is the most efficient as the overhead is caused only by the storage copy.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are multiple ways to perform storage migration from libvirt. It is possible to simply copy the storage to the new destination and then swap the original disk with the new one. This approach is the most efficient as the overhead is caused only by the storage copy.
```

> From libvirt side there a multiple ways to achieve the storage migration. It is possible to simply copy the storage on the new destination and then swap the original disk wit the new one. This approach is the most efficient as the overhead is caused only by the storage copy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From libvirt there a multiple ways to achieve the storage migration. It is possible to copy the storage on the new destination and then swap the original disk with the new one. This approach is the most efficient as the overhead is caused only by the storage copy.
```

> A different approach is to simultaneously move the storage and live-migrate the guest. When the destination storage is not available on the host where the VM is executing, this solution is required. For this case, costs are greater since there is a storage as well as a live VM migration overhead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A different approach is to simultaneously move the storage and live-migrate the guest. When the destination storage is not available on the host where the VM is executing, this solution is required. For this case, costs are greater since there is storage as well as live VM migration overhead.
```

> As KubeVirt is designed today and due to Kubernetes design principles of volume pod immutability, it isn't possible to hotplug and unplug new volumes while the pod is still running. KubeVirt already supports volume hotplug by attaching new volume to a dummy pod and then by bind mounting the storage in `virt-launcher` pod. Sadly, this method fails to address the issue of removing the old PVCs that were expressly declared in the virt-launcher pod.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As KubeVirt is designed today and due to Kubernetes design principles of volume pod immutability, it isn't possible to hotplug and unplug new volumes while the pod is still running. KubeVirt already supports volume hotplug by attaching a new volume to a dummy pod and then bind mounting the storage in the `virt-launcher` pod. Sadly, this method fails to address the issue of removing old PVCs that were expressly declared in the virt-launcher pod.
```

Declaring all volumes hotpluggable could be a potential remedy, but we prefer to avoid it because it has been shown to be fragile for some storage providers and opaque to Kubernetes.

> The only workable and generic solution for this restriction appears to be to live migrate the VM with storage. Live migration involves the creation of a new virt-launcher pod by KubeVirt that has the destination PVCs attached. The source virt-launcher pod and source PVCs are removed after the migration is finished because they are no longer needed.

Reviewer 2: > The source virt-launcher pod and source PVCs are removed after the migration is finished because they are no longer needed.

This might be a bit confusing. According to the design, the PVCs are handled respecting the specified reclaim policy (either delete or retain).

Author: You're right. The sentence also doesn't explain much, I'd simply remove it

 ## Definition of Users
This feature is for all KubeVirt users who want to move the PVCs assigned to a VM without workload interruptions.

## User Stories

  1. As a VM owner, the storage class of volumes used by a running VM is deprecated, and the volumes need to be moved to another storage class.
  2. As a VM owner, I want to use higher performance storage class that is now available in the cluster.
  3. As a VM owner, I see my non-resizable storage device filling up and I want to move my VM to a larger storage device without interruptions in order to give it more storage.
  4. As an infra admin, I need to replace the storage array due to a hardware refresh and I want to do this without stopping the VMs in order to make this infra operation transparent to VM owners.

## Repos

  - [kubevirt/kubevirt](https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt)

# Design
This proposal introduces a new CRD called `VolumeMigration`

## Volume migration custom resource

```golang
type VolumeMigration struct {
	metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
	metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`
	Spec VolumeMigrationSpec `json:"spec"valid:"required"`
	Status VolumeMigrationStatus `json:"status,omitempty"`
}

> 

Author: Sounds good, I'll update it

type VolumeMigrationList struct {
	metav1.TypeMeta `json:",inline"`
	metav1.ListMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`
	Items []VolumeMigration `json:"items"`
}

type SourcePvcReclaimPolicy string
const (
	SourcePvcReclaimPolicyDelete SourcePvcReclaimPolicy = "Delete"
	SourcePvcReclaimPolicyRetain SourcePvcReclaimPolicy = "Retain"
)

type MigratedVolume struct {
	SourcePvc      string `json:"sourcePvc" valid:"required"`
	DestinationPvc string `json:"destinationPvc" valid:"required"`
	SourcePvcReclaimPolicy SourcePvcReclaimPolicy `json:"sourcePvcReclaimPolicy,omitempty"`
}

type VolumeMigrationSpec struct {
	MigratedVolume []MigratedVolume `json:"migratedVolume,omitempty"`
}

type VolumeMigrationPhase string

const (
	VolumeMigrationPhasePending    = "Pending"
	VolumeMigrationPhaseRunning    = "Running"
	VolumeMigrationPhaseScheduling = "Scheduling"
	VolumeMigrationPhaseSucceeded  = "Succeeded"
	VolumeMigrationPhaseFailed     = "Failed"

> 	VolumeMigrationPhaseUnknown    = "Unknown"

Reviewer 3: These are technically strings not `VolumeMigrationPhase`

)

type VolumeMigrationPhaseTransitionTimestamp struct {
	Phase                    VolumeMigrationPhase `json:"phase,omitempty"`
	PhaseTransitionTimestamp metav1.Time          `json:"phaseTransitionTimestamp,omitempty"`
}

> type MigratedVolumeState string

Reviewer 3: Confused by `MigratedVolumeState` vs `VolumeMigrationPhase` wondering if there are more descriptive names

Author: I'm not sure about the right names here. Suggestions are welcome! 

The `VolumeMigrationPhase` is similar to the [VirtualMachineInstanceMigrationPhase](VirtualMachineInstanceMigrationPhase) while `MigratedVolumeState` indicates the status of each migrated volume.

Reviewer 3: I got the impression that `VolumeMigration` had two steps.  1) validate that the set of PVCs can in fact be migrated 2) do the migration.  I also got the impression that `MigratedVolumeState` does not change after step 1.  If both of those things are true maybe it makes sense to think as `MigratedVolumeState` a `VolumeValidation`?  Or maybe the Kubernetes condition model better fits somehow?

Author: Your understanding is correct. `MigratedVolumeState` don't change after the validation. If all the migrated volumes are valid only then we proceed with the migration. I thought to State because it could be pending, but I can change it to `VolumeValidation`

Author: I changed and renamed the field `MigratedVolumeState` to `VolumeValidation`

const (
        MigratedVolumeStateValid    = "Valid"
        MigratedVolumeStatePending  = "Pending"
        MigratedVolumeStateRejected = "Rejected"
)

type VolumeMigrationState struct {
        MigratedVolume `json:",inline"`
        State     MigratedVolumeState `json:"state,omitempty"`

>         Reason    *string             `json:"reason,omitempty"`

Reviewer 3: Wondering if a client of this API may like more granular rejected states?  For example, some volumes will get rejected for intrinsic reasons like it's virtiofs, others for temporary reasons like hotplug, others for implementation details that may change later like multiple VMIs

Author: @mhenriks I don't quite understand your comment. The reason applies for a single migrated volume pair. If you look at the third example in the [API example](https://github.com/alicefr/community/blob/storage-class-migration/design-proposals/volume-migration/volume-migration.md#api-examples), there are 2 rejected volumes for 2 distinct reasons.

Author: Ok, in the actual code, I have declared those [strings](https://github.com/alicefr/kubevirt/blob/storage-migration/staging/src/kubevirt.io/api/storage/v1alpha1/types.go#L71-L78) but I can create a custom type for the reason if you prefer. For the VolumeStatus, we are also using [a string for `Reason`](https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/blob/main/staging/src/kubevirt.io/api/core/v1/types.go#L335)

        PhaseTransitionTimestamps   []VolumeMigrationPhaseTransitionTimestamp `json:"phaseTransitionTimestamps,omitempty"`
}
```

Users may define more than one migrated volume, and those volumes may be associated with the same VMI, a different VMI, or none at all. The volumes defined on the same VMI will be categorized and grouped by the volume migration controller.

At the moment, PVCs can only be migrated using this API if they belong to a single running virtual machine. Consequently, all volume migration objects that have migrated volumes that are associated with different VMIs will be rejected by the controller. The object is in the `Pending` state if none of the migrated volumes have been assigned to a VMI, since the VMI might be created at a later time.

The `VolumeMigration` expects a list of source and destination PVCs and the destination PVCs needs to be created either manually by the user or other tools.

According to the `SourcePvcReclaimPolicy`, KubeVirt will determine how to handle the source PVCs. The source PVC will be automatically deleted under the `Delete` policy, but it will remain untouched under the `Retain` policy.

> If the user doesn't specify any reclaim policy, the `Delete` policy will be set as default.

Reviewer 3: I don't know if `Delete` should be the default

Author: I see advantages and disadvantages. The PVCs are automatically cleaned up if you don't specify anything, but keeping them around could be a more conservative choice.
But neither @vasiliy-ul  or I had a strong opinion about the default value, hence I can set it to `Retain`

Author: See https://github.com/kubevirt/community/pull/245#discussion_r1461533893

Reviewer 3: To me it's better safe than sorry with defaults

This migrating to a new storage provider is an exceptional operation, and very resource intensive. If in the future, the k8s community will consider the volume mutability in the pod spec, then the lighter approach could be taken into consideration.

### Design

This feature adds an additional controller for the CRD `Volume Migration` to virt-controller. Once the VolumeMigration object is created then KubeVirt will update the VMI status with the source and destination volume pairs.

Afterwards, the controller will create a VirtualMachineInstanceMigration to trigger the VM live migration.

If there are some migrated volumes in the VMI status, the VM migration controller will replace the destination volumes by creating the target virt-launcher pod with the new volumes and virt-launcher will select the source volumes to be migrated.

Once the migration completes, the controller will update the migrated volumes first in the VMI spec. This will trigger the update of the volumes in the VM spec if it exists.

> DataVolumes are taken into account in the current proposal. DataVolumes are used to import the image during VM provisioning, but they may essentially be thought of as PVCs for the rest of the VM life cycle. According to this proposal, KubeVirt will replace the source DataVolumes with the destination PVC when a user wishes to migrate data to a PVC.

Reviewer 3: Given the example below it looks like dataVolumeTemplates are removed from the VM definition.  May want to add that here?  Also not sure that is the "right" thing to do.

Author: Yes, Datavolumes are removed from the VM volumes and we replace the source claim with the destination. 
Keeping datavolumes doesn't make much sense to me. 
We are migrating to another PVC (with another claim name). If we need to keep DVs around then we need a new mechanism to update datavolumes to the new claim name and the assumption that the dv name = pvc name doesn't work anymore. IMO, this makes the entire design and implementation more complicated.

Or do you see any reasons for not replacing DVs?

Reviewer 3: I totally get not bothering with DataVolumes when they are stand alone.  I'm just not as sure in the dataVolumeTemplate case.

FYI:  for DR I will be adding code to virt-controller to handle creating DVs when PVCs are created out of band

Author: You are right, here, I was a bit naive. I thought I could leave untouched the dataVolumeTemplate and only update the vm.Spec.Template.Spec.Volumes. However, I have just tried when the source pvc is deleted then the datavolume import is triggered again :/.
 Maybe with the Retain policy this won't happen since the original PVC still exist. Do you think I can delete also the  source DV together with the source PVC? I'd like to avoid to mess up with the owner reference of the DV.
But definitely this part isn't working properly

Author: I just checked, with the `Retain` policy, the DV import isn't re-triggered.

Author: @mhenriks this commit https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/pull/10536/commits/59c888d65d195302f6a20c6a128138efb8273d64 describes a possible solution.

If the reclaim policy is delete, then we delete the corresponding DVs for the source PVC.

In all the cases, if there is A DV associated to one of the source migrated volume, then we remove it from the datavolumeTemplate during the VM spec update. Basically, after a successful volume migration. Does it sound reasonable to you?

Author: As we discussed offline, we decided to remove the DVs from the VM specification. In the case, of datavolumes templates, also this field is remove from the VM spec. I added more details in the proposal

        kubevirt.io/vm: vm-alpine-datavolume
    spec:
      domain:
        devices:
          disks:
          - disk:
              bus: virtio
            name: datavolumedisk1
          interfaces:
          - masquerade: {}
            name: default
        resources:
          requests:
            memory: 128Mi
      networks:
      - name: default
        pod: {}
      terminationGracePeriodSeconds: 0
      volumes:
      - dataVolume:
          name: source-pvc
        name: datavolumedisk1

```

Trigger the migration with:
```yaml
apiVersion: storage.kubevirt.io/v1alpha1
kind: VolumeMigration
metadata:
  name: vol-mig
spec:
  migrationVolumes:
  - sourcePvc: source-pvc
    destinationPvc: dest-pvc
    reclaimPolicySourcePvc: Delete
```

Once the migration succeed:

Changes on the VMI:
```yaml

apiVersion: v1
items:
- apiVersion: kubevirt.io/v1
  kind: VirtualMachineInstance
[...]
    volumes:
    - name: datavolumedisk1
      persistentVolumeClaim:
        claimName: dest-pvc
 status:
    migrationState:
      completed: true
      endTimestamp: "2023-08-17T08:14:45Z"
 [...]
      migrationVolumes:
      - destinationPvc: dest-pvc
        sourcePvc: source-pvc

>         reclaimPolicySourcePvc: Delete

Reviewer 3: Not sure about all this VolumeMigration info mirrored in the VMI.  Is it necessary?

Author: We could skip the reclaim policy, but the source and destination are necessary because virt-launcher uses this information on the VMI status to manipulate the migration XML and to understand which volumes need to be migrated.

Author: Not only virt-launcher uses this information, but also the VM and VMI controllers for update the VM/VMI spec. See the PR for reference: https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/pull/10536

Reviewer 3: Okay sounds good, was mostly wondering

  3. As a VM owner, I see my non-resizable storage device filling up and I want to move my VM to a larger storage device without interruptions in order to give it more storage.
  4. As an infra admin, I need to replace the storage array due to a hardware refresh and I want to do this without stopping the VMs in order to make this infra operation transparent to VM owners.

## Repos

  - [kubevirt/kubevirt](https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt)

# Design
This proposal introduces a new CRD called `VolumeMigration`

## Volume migration custom resource

```golang
type VolumeMigration struct {
	metav1.TypeMeta   `json:",inline"`
	metav1.ObjectMeta `json:"metadata,omitempty"`
	Spec              VolumeMigrationSpec `json:"spec" valid:"required"`
	Status VolumeMigrationStatus `json:"status,omitempty"`
}

type VolumeMigrationList struct {
	metav1.TypeMeta `json:",inline"`
	metav1.ListMeta `json:"metadata"`
	Items []VolumeMigration `json:"items"`
}

type SourceReclaimPolicy string

const (
	SourceReclaimPolicyDelete SourceReclaimPolicy = "Delete"
	SourceReclaimPolicyRetain SourceReclaimPolicy = "Retain"
)

> type MigratedVolume struct {

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
type DestinationVolume struct {
```
What about this? I'm not a native speaker but using past tense here seems a bit weird.

Author: Not sure, I see your point but DestinationVolume looks incomplete to me as it includes more information. I would try to find a better name

	SourceClaim              string                   `json:"sourceClaim" valid:"required"`
	DestinationClaim         string                   `json:"destinationClaim" valid:"required"`
	SourceReclaimPolicy SourceReclaimPolicy `json:"sourceReclaimPolicy,omitempty"`
}

type VolumeMigrationSpec struct {

> 	MigratedVolume []MigratedVolume `json:"migratedVolume,omitempty"`

Reviewer 4: Does it make sense to use the plural here since it's a list?

	Validation     MigratedVolumeValidation `json:"validation,omitempty"`
	Reason         *string                  `json:"reason,omitempty"`
}

type VolumeMigrationStatus struct {
	VolumeMigrationStates       []VolumeMigrationState                    `json:"volumeMigrationStates,omitempty"`
	VirtualMachineInstanceName  *string                                   `json:"virtualMachineInstanceName,omitempty"`
	VirtualMachineMigrationName *string                                   `json:"virtualMachineMigrationName,omitempty"`
	StartTimestamp              *metav1.Time                              `json:"startTimestamp,omitempty"`
	EndTimestamp                *metav1.Time                              `json:"endTimestamp,omitempty"`
	Phase                       VolumeMigrationPhase                      `json:"phase,omitempty"`
	PhaseTransitionTimestamps   []VolumeMigrationPhaseTransitionTimestamp `json:"phaseTransitionTimestamps,omitempty"`
}
```

Users may define more than one migrated volume, and those volumes may be associated with the same VMI, a different VMI, or none at all. The volumes defined on the same VMI will be categorized and grouped by the volume migration controller.

> At the moment, PVCs can only be migrated using this API if they belong to a single running virtual machine. Consequently, all volume migration objects that have migrated volumes that are associated with different VMIs will be rejected by the controller. The object is in the `Pending` state if none of the migrated volumes have been assigned to a VMI, since the VMI might be created at a later time.

Reviewer 4: Do you intend to support volumes owned by different VMIs and any PVC in general in the future?

Author: Maybe, my first version of this CRD was supporting multiple VMIs and PVCs.  However, after discussing this with @awels and @vasiliy-ul we decided to keep it simple for the first version and to support a single VM per volume migration object.
Additionally, @awels is working on an overlaying tool that should create multiple volume migrations object based on VMs and that would take care to create the destination volumes.
